Jeff, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thank you for having me.
It's great to have you here.
We're going to talk maps and consuming map data
and a lot of interesting research that you've done with the data.
So you have a very cool project, OSMNX,
OpenStreetMapNetworkX, that we're going to dive into.
And it really makes all of this street and map data
super accessible to users of Python, right? Yeah. Yeah. Excellent. I'm really looking forward to
talking about that. Before we dive into it, though, just a quick introduction. Who are you?
Yeah. So my name is Jeff Boeing. I'm an assistant professor at the University of Southern California
here in Los Angeles. I'm in its Department of Urban Planning and Spatial Analysis.
And most of my research and teaching are around that intersection of urban planning and spatial analysis.
I did my PhD in city planning at UC Berkeley.
And my focus is on urban data science.
So using Python tools, usually open data, to try to understand cities and housing markets and transportation networks and how people move through space and how we can make our cities more resilient to natural disasters, which is relevant in L.A. this week.
also more equitable, nicer places to walk around and basically just better for urban living.
Okay. Well, that sounds like amazing, amazing research. It's probably interesting to live in LA
as one of the bigger, crazier locations in terms of sort of traffic and congestion and populations,
not New York in terms of density, but it's, it's probably its own special beast, I imagine.
Yeah, it is. You know, LA is an ironic place to be an urban planning professor because it can be so frustrating for a lot of our best practices in urban planning.
But at the same time, there is no better place in the U.S. to be studying and trying to intervene into some of these crises that urban planning has wrought.
Yeah. Yeah, a lot of it was just, I imagine in the early days, just a free for all. Right.
there was people, especially out in the West, right? The U S West,
people will just move out there and there was not a whole lot going on.
So when a city just neighborhoods go that way and not quite enough density for
a lot of public transit makes it, makes it challenging.
And then they become huge cities and that,
but they're stuck with those consequences like,
yeah, exactly. And it's hard to,
to retrofit a city once it's built out because those are people's homes and
private properties that you can't just, you know, cut from whole cloth,
laid out a new city plan.
Yeah. Yeah.
Are there cities out there that are basically planned from scratch?
Yeah, there are.
Places like Brasilia, the capital of Brazil,
was a master planned city in the modernist era,
mid-century city planning,
where it's designed to look almost like the shape of an airplane.
For the jet age, a modern city for the jet age.
Amazing.
But, you know, there's a wide range of how cities come to be.
Some of them are very organic, like you think old medieval cities that just kind of formed over centuries.
There are places like L.A. that built out very rapidly or like in Chicago,
all these straight lines following from these 19th century ideas of rationality and orthogonal street networks.
And then there are these master plan cities where, you know, strong central leadership lets you lay it down.
However, you think is best.
I imagine that how the cities are built has a lot to do with the people who helped construct the city or there in the early days, how they perceived distance.
Right. People perceive distance in L.A. by how you how far can you go in a car in 20 minutes?
the people perceived distance in Stuttgart, how far can you walk?
Maybe you can take a horse, you know, potentially.
Right. And that really probably changes things.
Yeah.
You know, one way we talk about that idea of the perception of distance
and how the urban form shapes up
is this idea of transportation technologies in different eras.
And in general, you really see something of a death of geography.
That is, if you look at a 1990s suburb of Philadelphia or of Los Angeles, they look very similar to each other.
You don't see that sort of local culture.
What you see is really building around the transportation technology and design aesthetic of the era rather than the local hands building the place up.
And it's, you know, when cars are how you get around, you build a city designed for cars.
Yeah.
And then the cars get to be huge SUVs and they still don't fit.
All right.
Let's talk.
You have this really cool visualization,
which I'm going to link to in the show notes called city street
orientations around the world.
And it's got some pretty wild graphics.
You want to tell people about this and kind of try to describe it for folks
listening.
Yeah.
So what these show is the orientation of your city streets.
By orientation, we mean on a compass.
Like, do they point north, south, east, west?
Are they off that north, south, east, west orientation?
Or do your streets point more chaotically in all directions around the compass?
Like, there isn't a more consistent orientation.
So to visualize these, I used what's basically just a histogram.
But it's a polar histogram.
So where a normal histogram will count your observations across some set of bins, for a polar histogram, we've wrapped those bins around the circle of a compass so that each bin represents 10 degrees around the compass.
And there's 36 bins total for 360 degrees around the circle.
And then the length of each of the bars in those bins represents the frequency of streets pointing in that direction in the city.
So in a place like Chicago or Beijing on screen here, most of the streets point north, south, east, west.
And what that tells us is it's kind of grid-like.
And this is common in a lot of cities around the world. Even a lot of pre-modern cities would still orient themselves generally north, south, east, west, just based on patterns where the sun was rising and setting.
Yeah, I'm super surprised to see, for example, Barcelona is pretty, not north, south, but it's 90 degrees.
Yeah. So in Barcelona, you see that 19th century and early 20th century,
a Champla development. So around medieval old Barcelona,
Il Defonce Serra da laid out his grand city plan that is fairly grid-like around it.
You can really see that here.
Yeah, absolutely. For people listening, some of them look like airplane four-blade propellers,
and some look maybe like boat propellers, like really dense. But yeah, it's quite wild to get
a quick look do we have la in there we must right um i have la in the big one if you scroll down
we have american cities oh yeah yeah yeah okay that's a pretty stark contrast it's like all of
them are propeller looking other than boston and interestingly charlotte boston yeah really
interesting yeah but charlotte doesn't feel like a city like that to me but what do i yeah so so
Boston is kind of one of those pre-modern, say, American cities. And its street orientation looks
like that for a couple of reasons. One, Boston is an agglomeration of multiple smaller towns
over several centuries, and each of them had grids to some extent, but they didn't all face
the same way. So they all got merged together. And then it has a lot of hills that made it harder to
build, especially in the early days. And it would really predate America's obsession with grids.
Charlotte is kind of the opposite. It's late 20th century, the sort of winding streets and
cul-de-sacs to make up those arterial roads and then these sort of secluded in the center super
blocks of subdivisions. Nice. Well, I'm happy to see that Portland, where I live,
is like a perfect propeller blade shape.
You know, in our town,
you have Northeast, Northwest, Southeast,
and then street numbers like Northeast 120th Street, right?
And it just screams.
We're on a perpendicular North, Southeast, West grid.
And it definitely shows up here.
And so this is some of the stuff
that you came up with, OSM and X.
Yeah, so I used OSM and X
to build all of these street network models from OpenStreetMap data.
And then OSMNX has built into it a visualization module
that creates these kind of polar histograms
to understand how streets are oriented.
Awesome. It's super interesting.
And it's like it communicates to you just immediately
as you look at it. It's great.
Let's start by talking about OpenStreetMap.
This is the backing data, obviously, the important backing data of your library.
So what's the origin of OpenStreetMap?
Yeah, so OpenStreetMap started maybe 20 years ago or so.
For folks who haven't seen it before, I often describe it as being akin to Google Maps meets Wikipedia.
So it's a worldwide mapping project with global coverage.
Anyone can edit or contribute to it.
There is some editorial oversight as well to validate those edits.
But what's cool about OpenStreetMap is that its data license allows you to pull data from it.
So unlike, say, Google Maps, which is fairly limited in what all it can draw,
you can really pull all of these features from OpenStreetMap.
And if you look, if you just zoom in on one of these cities here.
Yeah, let's go to Riverside.
Yeah, surface streets, rail lines, building footprints, parks, train stations, often grocery stores, restaurants, public schools, all this stuff we're interested in from an urban planning perspective.
Yeah. Oh, it's really interesting. And you can add in additional layers like cycling maps or transportation maps or topology maps, topological maps, all sorts of interesting things here.
Yeah, exactly. And it really lets you kind of hone in on the specific characteristics of the city that you're interested in.
And there's a humanitarian layer that you can see. And this has been one of the big uses of OpenStreetMap now for 15 years or so.
Often when there is a disaster in a less developed country, humanitarian aid organizations will go in and use OpenStreetMap and contribute to it to create kind of a digital layer of the facts on the ground.
So the Haiti earthquake a few years back was a primary example of that, where it helped them understand where urbanization was, where there were water pumps, toilets, and so forth, the kind of things that people need, but aren't well mapped, often in these informal settlements.
Yeah. Oh, it's, it's amazing. We have, you know, I think everyone was amazed when Google Maps came out, right? Before then we had MapQuest and all those things. You'd have big little up arrow, up arrow, right arrow to like pull in tiles of the world and, you know, Google Maps and the worldview that they had. What was that product called? Remember?
where you could kind of fly.
It was like a 3D thing.
You could kind of fly around in the early days,
but it was the same basic data, I think.
Anyway, when that stuff came out,
it was like, wow, this stuff is,
you can now know about the world.
You can say, where did that road go?
I never went down.
You could just follow it and see
or go to Street View or whatever.
But a lot of that is locked behind
however Google wants you to use it, right?
And it's not super accessible.
And so having something like this
where people can contribute,
especially if they care about their neighborhood, right?
A lot of this people are contributing back
into OpenStreetMap data.
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, so the nice thing with this is that
it really is much more in that open source,
open data model of the world,
which means we can do open science with it,
citizen science with it.
People who just notice that stuff is missing
in their own community, you're able to fix it.
It's no longer that frustration of,
well, when will Google get this thing right?
hey, we have this new highway that was built outside my town.
When's it going to show up?
I mean, it's up to you.
You can make it show up later today.
There is a drawback to that, though.
The drawback is you get what we call sampling biases.
That is, you tend to see more coverage in places where people tend to contribute more.
And those things tend to be correlated with demographic characteristics.
Men contribute more than women.
Higher income places more than lower income places.
just from a resourcing perspective.
And so one of the challenges we face as researchers
using OpenStreetMap data for our analytics work
is keeping those in mind
because it's hard to do comparative analysis.
If you don't know,
it's because the infrastructure is actually different
in two places or because it's been digitized
to a different extent in two places.
- Right, right, right.
Just maybe higher fidelity information
might skew some analysis one way or another, right?
That's right, exactly.
And it tends to work pretty well comparatively for stuff like roads, streets, whereas things like pedestrian footpaths or fresh food markets might be well digitized in San Francisco and Portland, but probably not, say, in a small town in India or Indonesia, let alone like a suburb of Des Moines, Iowa.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
One of the apps that I use a lot is OnX.
Do you know OnX?
yeah on x is cool you can i do a lot of off-road motorcycle riding and it'll show you all the
little trails and stuff but you know someone's got to go and enter all that information and so
some places are super well mapped and others are are not on the map at all but
yeah i imagine they probably get some of their data from open street map as well though i haven't
been able to tell. Yeah, it's a good question. A lot of people downstream do use OpenStreetMap
data because of its quality and accessibility. Yeah. Mark out in the audience is asking,
is there some kind of mobile app that kind of gives you access to the OpenStreetMap
data? Kind of like Google Maps. Yeah, there are some mobile apps for it.
I don't use them. It has some challenges with routing because it is publicly editable.
Sometimes there'll be little breaks in the connections where it's not digitized quite right.
But there are routing apps.
You could replace, say, Google Maps on your phone with OpenStreetMap and you can route with it.
Works particularly well in big cities and places like Europe and the U.S.,
less so in small rural areas or in less developed countries.
Yeah, the OnX thing is it doesn't really route you.
but it shows you on a map and then shows you where you go on it.
And if you choose to stay on the path, then it'll really help you.
But it, it, it doesn't really say, you can't say, give me directions.
At least not, not when you're off-road, if you're on road,
maybe it'll fall back to something that works, but yeah, amazing.
So what's the licensing story behind all this data?
Like how the name probably gives a lot of it away, open street map,
but how is this data usable? What can people do with it?
Yeah, so it's basically usable for non-commercial purposes with attribution.
So, for example, as researchers, when we are using these data, we just need to attribute
where it came from, OpenStreetMap and its contributors.
And I ended up including that license information somewhere on the README for OSM and X, because
I think a lot of time people will look over these underlying data sources and tools when
they're using these kind of downstream, downstream tools and apps.
So because of that, I just wanted to call it.
Yeah, you can see it on screen here.
So I mentioned OpenStreetMaps' open data license requires that derivative works provide proper
attribution, which is really nice because it's a very easy thing to do for the cornucopia of
data that they make available. Yeah. Yeah. That's amazing. If I wanted to build a commercial
product, I wanted to build on X squared or whatever, where I could have people
drive around and use that and map it and make notes and maybe contribute back.
Do you know what the story, I mean, obviously not a lawyer, right? But what's the,
would people be able to do that? Or is there a paid API or how does it work?
It's a, it's a good question. So I know in practice people can, because I see commercial
tools that use OpenStreetMap data all the time. I don't know the details though, because one of the
nice things about being in academia is you end up being so divorced from the commercial world that
I don't have to worry about that. Yeah. That's pretty good, right? Just do your research,
answer interesting questions, and follow the lead, right? Those are the benefits. Yeah. It comes with
drawbacks, but those are the benefits. Yeah. I'm aware of some of the drawbacks as well, for sure.
All right. Well, so that is the foundation of this project, OSMNX.
Tell us about your project.
Yeah. So OSMNX is a Python package that lets you interact with OpenStreetMaps APIs to make it really easy to download data and build models or a data frame of those data.
So the two main things that it does is it can create a graph model.
So that is a model of a network like streets or rails or highways or anything else.
Or you can create a geodata frame.
That's kind of a spatialized version of a pandas data frame using geopandas of OpenStreetMap features.
So that's all the stuff in OpenStreetMap.
It could be points, lines, polygons.
It could be traffic signals or parks or schools or roads.
But you can download either of those and then do whatever it is you want to do with them.
And OSMNX has some other stuff built in.
So it has a simple routing engine built in, some visualization tools.
You can work with elevation so that you can figure out street grades, particularly relevant.
For example, if you're a cyclist and you're trying to choose a shortest path that maybe minimizes those grades and so forth.
Even for cars, Google started offering a this path saves, use the least fuel or in my case, the least electricity, whatever, whatever you put into it to make it go.
That's also, you know, that's uses like that would be interesting.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, kind of superficially, we always imagine that our shortest path to get somewhere is
the one that minimizes our travel time.
But in reality, there are a lot of other things we try to minimize, including fuel consumption
or for pedestrians.
Empirically, we know that people will take longer routes if it's a nicer route.
We're not trying to shake off a minute to walk along the arterial road with the aluminum
smelter next to it.
You go through the fence by that old abandoned factory back here and go straight across.
it'll be it'll be great you'll save a minute like yeah i'll go the long way exactly amazing okay
yeah super fun and as part of those visualizations can you draw maps like can you
you can yeah so it has um some mapping capabilities um you can also plot routes on it
It ties into a Folium package, which is a Python package to develop leaflet JavaScript web maps.
So you can do interactive web maps from it.
And then on top of OSMNX, there's a cool downstream package called Pretty Maps that I'm not affiliated with,
but does really nice, aesthetically pleasing mapping.
It's really customizable and really cool.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Do you have a gallery or something?
I do, yeah. So if you scroll up a little bit, there's a link to the examples gallery. It's on
GitHub OSMNX examples.
Oh, then you can pull up different notebooks, huh?
Yeah, exactly. So each notebook kind of covers a different theme of analyses that would be
commonly done with OSMNX.
Oh, nice. Yeah, that's really cool. And people can just pull up the notebook and see how it works.
What one do you think is a good representative one to maybe get a sense of how to work with it?
So we count from zero because we're in the Python world.
So notebook zero zero is a good place to start.
It kind of steps through some of the basic functionality
that most users would be interested in starting with.
Sure, okay.
Yeah, so people can download these notebooks
in the examples repository, which I'll link to.
Yeah, that's really good.
Yeah, exactly.
So there's a getting started guide in the documentation.
After kind of reading through that,
that examples gallery is a really good way
to just kind of get a sense of code
that you can copy and paste to get started.
- Okay, excellent.
And 5,000 GitHub stars, almost a thousand forks.
You know, that's quite a bit of traction.
Congratulations.
- Yeah, thanks.
I mean, it's weird.
This is very much my side hustle,
but it's also really been a labor of love
for a long time now.
There is no reward in academia
for creating open source packages.
I think if you explain it very carefully
to academic power brokers, they say,
that makes sense, that's great, that's a good contribution.
But prima facie, that doesn't mean anything.
- Yeah, it's tough to put it
on a 10 year application, right?
- Yeah, it makes it sound like you're wasting your time
and you don't understand what you're supposed to be doing
with your time.
- Like, but you understand the research is so easy now.
Yeah. I mean, that's really how that started. I thought I was going to be able to do this research without having to create my own tool, but it turned out I was not able to.
Interesting. What was your background on programming at that point?
Yeah, so my undergrad and master's degree, I did computer systems and information systems.
I worked in the private sector for a few years and decided to go back to school for my PhD in urban planning.
But when I was coming into that, I was pitching myself as the sort of like data science analytics kind of person in that world, which was starting to get kind of hot at that time.
So it ended up being a nice fit. And when I started my dissertation, I had this dissertation proposal that was, you know, very, very nice.
It's kind of big, grand proposal. I ended up only doing the first chapter of it for my entire dissertation because of how these things expand to fill space.
And when I pitched my proposal to my dissertation committee, there were a lot of assumptions about the tools that were out there.
You know, I knew OpenStreetMap was out there.
I'd seen there were some tools to download and work with data from it.
So I was pretty sure we'd be able to create a nice mathematical graph model of OpenStreetMap data automatically.
As I started on my first week of making that happen, I realized that the tool did not exist.
And in fact, it was profoundly difficult to get data from OpenStreetMap if you wanted to filter it.
Like, I just want pedestrian paths, not everything.
I just want drivable streets, not everything else.
And so the first year of my dissertation work was creating the first version of OSM and X accordingly.
So you must have grants and stuff for your research, as academics do.
How much time are you allowed to sort of bring some of that into, you know, adding features back to this project?
Yeah, you know, back to the benefits of academia, the nice thing is as long as you get what they want to see done, as long as those outputs are there, your time is really completely your own.
Right. You teach a couple classes. You have to publish a few papers a year. Other than that, you're free to do whatever.
So I do get grants to fund my graduate students.
Ironically, it's very hard to get grants to do this kind of open source software, open commons development.
Everyone talks about it, especially grant funders know how much we all use this stuff.
And they really like it, but it just doesn't get funded.
So what you have to do is you have to kind of hack it in or sideload it, I guess, into your grants where the grant will answer this empirical question that's near and dear to the funder's heart.
But to do that, we have this tool building phase for six months, be able to unlock the analytics for it.
And so that's really how a lot of the features and a lot of the modules have been added to OSMNX over time.
There's this new project I ought to do. So we'll just build it into the package.
Right. We need to need to be able to answer new questions. So we got to have new ways to get to the data. Yeah.
yeah exactly and it's uh it is poorly incentivized in academia but academia has really been home to a
lot of open source tool development especially niche tools you know from stuff like astro pi
for the astronomers astrophysicists to things like pi sal the spatial analysis library in python
but a lot of things that academics have kind of been at the forefront of but for us it's always a
side hustle right stuff with biology psychology a lot of the sciences i imagine yeah yeah working
on open source projects like this feels to me very much like the concept of funding basic science
right not funding we need to solve this problem so we can create a bomb or new energy or go to space
but we're just doing it because we need to understand the science better and it'll help us
then apply it eventually maybe at some point right same sort of thing here like if these exist
it will supercharge the urban planning space to a huge degree but getting people to fund it or to
like care about helping build that up it's i imagine it's a little bit frustrating no that
that's exactly i mean i the way i i talk about it is it really is a sort of basic science work that
everyone takes for granted as though these things just exist, right?
That this tool just exists.
We don't know where it comes from.
It has an API that API just exists.
And it really kind of obscures all of these human decisions and social structures and
processes and institutions that make it difficult or make other things easy and really shape
what we end up being able to work with.
Yeah, absolutely.
Well, someday maybe you can put down, yeah, I only wrote two papers, but I have 10,000
GetUp stars.
So here's your tenure assignment, you know?
This is the future.
I'm there for it.
It's a race between whether ChatGPT overtakes all of that stuff or you get there and people,
I don't know, that's a whole different deal.
We can talk about that later.
Let's talk about the Overpass API, though.
that's the way that you get data from OpenStreetMap.
What is this?
- Yeah, so the Overpass API is another open source tool
that lets us query OpenStreetMap's database
and download stuff, basically any of OpenStreetMap's features.
So what's nice about Overpass is that there's some public
instances that you can just query as a web API.
You can also host it locally if you want to work around throttling limits, rate limits.
Challenge with the Overpass API, you can see a little bit of it here on screen,
is that the OverpassQL, its query language, can be really hard to work with to do complex stuff.
So this is a fairly simple one.
On screen, we can see there's a bounding box with some lat-long coordinates to explain where we want to download data from.
The output will be in JSON format.
The server timeout is 90 seconds.
Big queries can take a long time to run.
And then we're querying here for way elements.
So way would be a line feature in OpenStreetMap.
Any line, it could be street.
It could also be the building footprints boundary line.
I see property lines or zoning or whatever, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Anything represented as a line.
And so we get that back out.
It'll be kicked out as a JSON.
And what OSMNX does is it works with this overpass API to try to automate some of these queries.
So rather than having to write the query yourself, download the data, and then convert that raw OpenStreetMap data into a useful data format, like drop it into GeoPandas or into a NetworkX graph, it assembles all of that under the hood.
It's open source.
It's well documented.
I have a few peer-reviewed articles about the exact process.
So we don't all have to reinvent the wheel trying to work with this data because none of this is automatic.
And in fact, you know, 10 plus years ago, people were very laboriously having to write these long scripts.
You know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to get a grad student and it's going to be their job for the summer to convert this to Excel or MATLAB for me.
Something like that?
Exactly.
Yeah.
Grad students are great.
But what's greater, I think, is having one or two lines of code to replace your grad student.
100% and let them do meaningful work that they also like, right?
Yeah.
That's the whole point.
- Yeah, yeah, it's fantastic.
As I look at this and think about this,
it feels to me like OSM and X is a little bit like an ORM
is to SQL and databases, right?
Like lets you, you think more in Python language and concepts
and don't worry about the query syntax and the data
and all that kind of stuff.
Is that a reasonable analogy?
- Yeah, that's a good way to put it.
And the goal for doing something like that
try to democratize doing some of these analyses you know open street map data are really amazing
overpass is an amazing resource but it's really hard to work with unless you have some software
development or database experience and a lot of urban planners or urban geographers or urban
sociologists do not they have great questions they have great theory they want a hypothesis test
right but we limit science if our tools are too difficult to use or the right data are too hard
to access yeah back to that basic science ideas right yeah yeah so for something like this what
osmx does is it puts that kind of overpatch query into much more natural language since pipon is so
readable in the first place you can just say something like graph from place give it a city
name, say Pasadena, California, my network type will be drive. And then just like that,
I have that drivable street network model within the city limits of Pasadena.
Right. Yeah, that sounds entirely more usable. And one of the things you said is that it can be
pretty expensive to query the overpass API. And so your library caches that stuff locally, right?
that's right yeah so expense in the computational sense all these things are free to
use yeah computationally expensive yeah exactly and there's a lot of time complexity to it as well
so what what uh what we do is we cache everything which helps you avoid rate limiting let's osmnx
be a good neighbor to these free um public commons resources that are out there
yeah interesting it sounds almost like you could have a docker containers for different
cities that are pre-loaded with all the data that might be that might be interesting just
instantaneously instantaneously answer a bunch of questions yeah which is really my work so a lot of
what i do will be um i study every street network for every urbanized area in the world right so
will have like 8,000 to 9,000 of these large urban models.
And so I'll just have things cached locally
so that the model building and analytics
are really at the forefront
rather than the downloading and querying for a day.
It's not only lets you be a good citizen
and not hammer on OpenStreetMaps API,
but it just lets your stuff work faster.
So the incentives are aligned there, right?
Yeah, and in fact, a lot of the time
when people first use osmnx you know you'll download the say the model of los angeles california
and it takes a minute to run the query on their server download whatever 100 megabytes of data
and then build that graph theoretic model do all the spatial stuff to it but after that it's nice
and fast the next time that you do it because you're able to skip all that pre-processing right
it probably puts it into some super efficient data structure,
oct trees or a tree or some others, you know, maybe dictionary, who knows, right?
Yeah. Yeah. And we use,
we use spatial indexes to accelerate all of the spatial queries locally too as
well.
Is that built into GeoPandas?
Yeah. Built into GeoPandas, there is an R tree,
which is probably the most common spatial index,
But in addition to that, we also use SciPy's KD tree.
They have like a C implementation of a K-dimensional tree
that we use for the nearest neighbor search.
So for example, in a Google Maps, you say,
from my origin to my destination, we can do the same kind of thing.
Say from this point to that point, we'll snap the nearest neighbor
on the network and then solve a path between them.
Okay.
So just the K-nearest neighbor algorithm sort of applied to,
what is that?
the vectors of the intersections or something,
or then you, the distance, the lines.
- Yeah, so normally when you do like origins
and destinations, you would snap to a node in the network.
So the nodes would be like the intersections and dead ends.
And then the edges would be the links,
the street segments that connect everything together.
And when you solve a path on a graph,
it would be from a start node to an end node.
you'd minimize it by something, either the fewest hops or the shortest distance or the
shortest travel time.
If you incorporate, say, speed limits, everything else, you can bring in congestion information
to minimize traffic congested travel time or minimize going up and down hills or anything
else.
Excellent.
If I got this data downloaded and I wanted to put it into a proper database, and by proper,
I mean, one that like is its own process.
Different machines can talk to it in parallel and whatever,
you know, like Postgres or Mongo or something.
Are there good databases that you would recommend
or that you've tried like EdgeDB or Neo4j
or graph databases the right way to go?
Or what do you think?
It depends on what you're trying to do
in terms of OpenStreetMap features.
So if you're just downloading features
and you're not worried about,
say those topological relationships between things,
like in a street network,
Any tabular data structure will do,
any kind of like SQL database will do just fine.
For a graph model, yeah, you'd want some kind of graph database
because they can handle graph algorithms to do stuff like routing
or other kinds of graph analytics,
like understanding connectivity on the network and over.
- Yeah, I have this, given this node,
tell me all the things that are connected to it.
Like those kinds of questions could be answered.
- Yeah, those kinds of questions, yeah.
Yeah, they're kind of pre-computed by the indices in the structures.
What about bringing in other data?
You know, what if I have real estate data that doesn't come from OpenStreetMap, but I want to pull that in and overlay it with, say, zoning information,
overlapped with census data that gives me how much that person in that area makes per year on average or something like that?
Can you answer questions like that?
Yeah, a really common use case.
So OSMNX can kind of do that by itself, but mostly as a tool in the toolkit to do it.
So, you know, a common way that we often will do this is for accessibility analyses.
So, for example, here at my house, how many grocery stores could I access within a 15-minute walk?
And it gives you a sense of, you know, how car-dependent or not a place is.
Also, we can start looking at food deserts in certain communities where people don't have access to fresh food.
So for that, what you're doing is you have a model of the network and then you also have all of this point of interest data, right?
So where all these amenities are located, you would then snap them, load them onto the graph, and then you can calculate accessibility by looking at where those things are located.
And you can either look at cumulative opportunities within some time horizon or distance to the nearest opportunity.
you can put different decays on it like the utility but being so far away drops off with a
linear decay the further i have to go or a non-linear decay it really drops off fast right
yeah if a grocery store is three miles away it's not one-third as useful as one that's one mile
away it's it's more to carry your groceries that far and similarly there's marginal utility for the
30th grocery store that you can reach doesn't give you that much benefit over the 29th that you can
Whereas the first and second are very valuable.
Yeah.
If it goes from zero to one and one to two,
those are big, big jumps right there.
Yep.
Yeah.
Okay.
Very interesting.
How about some projects that people might be thinking about?
You know, they look at this data and they're like, wow,
this looks really detailed and neat.
And we have all these different aspects we can ask about, but, you know,
maybe they just want to play around.
Yeah.
I mean, hopefully, you know, if you look at the getting started guide, these examples, you'll see it's really easy to play around, you know, two, three lines of code and you have a visualization of your local street network.
A few things that we've done in my lab at USC that may spark some interest.
We look at air pollution exposure and driving patterns in Los Angeles to try to understand, you know, who's driving and where.
And then in turn, who is exposed to that tailpipe, those tailpipe emissions from those cars.
So we use OSMNX to model those street networks, to simulate those trips and to look at what census tracts that stuff goes through.
We also use it for studies of urban form.
So that is kind of the shape, texture, density, the grain of a city.
I have this series of square mile visualizations of different cities around the world.
And you can really quickly see how different forms of urbanism look relative to each other.
So a place like Irvine, California, here in Southern California, has this really coarse grained street network.
A place like Venice in Italy has incredibly fine grained like spiderweb street network.
And stuff like that really helps to kind of convey these different modes of urbanism and urbanization.
We also use these to look at disaster resilience.
That is, different street networks will be better if things start going wrong around them.
Things with more redundancy, more connectivity built in are easier to route around if parts start failing in a fire, in an earthquake.
So we can calculate some of these characteristics and then make recommendations to planners and
policymakers about how to make your street network, how to intervene in it to make it
more resilient.
Yeah.
And my area, there's an east-west highway, one of the very few that goes from the city
west.
It has to go through this mountain tunnel.
And it's two lanes each way in the mountain or three lanes in the mountain tunnel.
And there's even on a Saturday afternoon, there's stopped cars trying to go through that tunnel.
And those are on good days.
Imagine if there was an emergency, it would just be done.
Yeah, that's the 26, right?
Exactly.
It is the 26.
Yeah, I used to live in Portland.
I lived in Goose Hollow.
And my gym was in Beaverton.
So I would have to go through that tunnel to go work out.
It would always be like, you know, one of these days.
One of these days.
Exactly.
Yeah, I live about a mile from Goose Hollow up through that tunnel.
So, yeah.
Oh, cool.
Yeah, yeah.
Very cool.
Yeah, but there's just – and that one's hard to fix because there's houses all along there.
It's a big hill.
It's hard to go over it.
You know, it would take a lot of willpower to make another tunnel.
Yeah, interesting thing.
I did my PhD at Berkeley and there is another tunnel there that goes from that kind of inner
East Bay, Berkeley, Oakland border out to the further east suburbs like Orinda, Moraga and so
forth. And that tunnel is really old. I mean, it's, I don't know, 80 years old, maybe something like
that. And they determined that when the big one does eventually hit, it will fail, it will collapse.
And it's not, it's cost prohibitive to actually prevent that from happening. So the idea is it
collapse and crush everyone in that tunnel and they will then build a new tunnel at that point when they have to.
Oh my goodness.
We have like that to look forward to.
Yeah, just go quickly when you're in the tunnel.
Get out of there.
I always did.
Amazing.
All right.
Let's talk real quickly about integrating OpenOSMNX with other data science tooling, right?
We have so many different things.
We have PyTorch.
We have Pandas.
We have Polars.
All the different things.
Like what are the different integration features?
You know, you talked about data frames.
That sounds like Pandas and Geopandas, right?
So that's one sort of path across those things.
Yeah, so OSMNX is built primarily on top of three things.
It's NetworkX for the graph models.
GeoPandas for the spatial data frames and Matplotlib for the visualizations.
In the spatial Python world, most stuff happens in the Pandas ecosystem because GeoPandas and PySan, similar tools, are very Pandas oriented.
I know there's been some work toward GeoPolar, but it's kind of in its infancy, as far as I know to this extent.
But that'll be great when that's available.
NetworkX is another funny one because it's a pure Python implementation.
It has a lot of loops.
And so it can go really slow for calculating some of these big time complexity graph algorithms.
Things like betweenness centrality where you have this massive OD matrix,
basically all the nodes to all the nodes.
Yeah, yeah, some combinatorial craziness.
It ends up being very time-consuming to calculate those kinds of things for a metro area-sized network model.
So we'll integrate with other tools.
iGraph does that in C.
Also, using tools like QGraph, where you can do it on a GPU instead.
Oh, wow. Okay. Yeah.
But it's limited because the waiting scheme doesn't let you say,
I want to minimize travel time, stuff like that.
I see.
Yeah, and then also integrated with Folium
to create interactive leaflet web maps out of the box.
Yeah.
I wonder how the free-threaded Python stuff
will affect some of those computational things.
Like that everything compared with everything else sounds like a so-called embarrassingly parallel sort of problem.
Right.
And so if you could just say, well, you have 10 cores, so let's just do 10 blocks of them all in parallel.
And, you know.
Yeah.
So that's what we do when we do it in pure Python.
So we'll use multiprocessing generally on your CPUs.
The only challenge is that your OD matrix, your origin destination matrix is growing at this exponential rate.
But then there's a linear number of cores.
So going from one to 24 and dividing by a factor of 24.
But when you have, say, a million nodes times a million nodes in your graph, it's going to take a long time.
It's still going to be slow.
You've gone from months down to weeks.
Yeah, I mean, you're still dividing it by the number of cores.
but it doesn't necessarily mean it's super fast.
Although the GPU stuff seems like it could absolutely fly, right?
Yeah, that makes a big difference.
And I think that's really the area of growth where handling,
I mean, basically getting out of Python loops in the first place
is the biggest area of growth.
And then doing things on a,
since these are really just very simple linear algebra problems,
being able to do them on a GPU makes it much more efficient.
Yeah.
Did you hear about this thing, this new NVIDIA, I don't know what it's called, Project Digits, where they announced a $3,000 desktop AI computer?
I mean, they call it AI, but really it's just a GPU beast.
That is interesting. No, I hadn't heard about that.
And this thing, it's the size of a Mac Mini.
If you look at the picture, it's a little bit of a golden thing.
It's kind of clever that made it gold, but that's a massive computer sitting next to you.
This is pretty interesting, actually, I think.
Yeah, that is.
I mean, it's shocking, too, because it looks so much smaller than just an NVIDIA card in your desktop.
I think it basically is just the GPU and nothing to do with graphics.
And then you just remote into it over, I don't know, a terminal or however you, or maybe you set it as the Docker host and then you just do Docker locally, but it runs there, you know, that type of thing.
I don't know how it works, but I kind of want one.
Yeah.
I mean, it looks sexy enough.
Of course you would want one, right?
Of course.
But if you had questions like that, if you say I have a million nodes and I could run that on a GPU, getting something like this that's, you know, kind of the H100 style of like the really large just meant for compute, not really a graphics card.
Yeah.
Seems like that would really unlock some interesting options.
Yeah, totally.
I mean, yeah.
So I have a GeForce card in my desktop that I'll pass some of that stuff locally onto.
but another one of the academic benefits at USC,
we have a high performance computing buster that I can schedule tasks to run on
that say over winter break and then come back in January and,
and the month of, of 1000 CPUs is all done.
That's amazing. We had a mainframe,
a Silicon graphics mainframe when I was studying math that we could all work on
of this group, maybe 10 of us. And it wasn't as big as what you're saying, but it was a quite
expensive, big machine. It had its own room and it was really loud to go into that room.
And I remember we came in to do whatever I was working on as a grad student or whatever. I think
it was a senior. Anyway, I came in to work on my project and nobody could access it. And it was
still in there making loud noises like it was running, but it acted like it wasn't running.
What is going on?
One of the other grad students had run a job like you're talking about,
but they were having trouble getting into work because they were math people,
not programmers.
And they started logging everything.
And there were no limits on what people could do to the computer.
The people had set it up.
And so what had happened is it ran 100% CPU on all the cores all night logging
until it ran out of space.
And then apparently the computer won't run anymore if it has zero more bytes.
It needed some temp file or something.
And so it was just done.
I imagine you guys have more guardrails than that.
Yeah, a lot of guardrails.
I would love to try to do something like that just
for the yuck sometime.
But we got to love it.
The admins of that computer would not
pleased with that grad student.
I can only imagine.
It took a long time to get it going.
It's like a day of work to get it turned back on.
Because they didn't even know what was wrong with it at first.
It just wouldn't turn on.
Oh, well.
Jumping back a moment to the integration, have you considered working with narwhals?
I looked into narwhals recently.
My understanding is one of the things that does well is it kind of abstracts away from pandas versus Polars.
So you're less tool dependent, right?
Yeah, and it also lets people who want to consume your library, who want to do their work in Polars,
talk Polars to your project and people want to do pandas talk pandas as well as qdf modem pyro
and other it kind of is an adapting layer so people can work in their native framework and
then talk to you yeah i mean yeah on paper it sounds great i haven't played with it yet other
than just being familiar with it but i mean that that sounds like the ideal right we shouldn't be
enforcing these certain APIs or languages on people.
Yeah, it does look interesting.
I believe it's foundational internals
or maybe just the API,
but they're Polars, not pandas,
so maybe that's not as good of a fit.
But it could be an interesting thing
to look in the future
to sort of make it native
to all the different data frame libraries
that people want to talk in.
Yeah, yeah, definitely.
Are you going to need a new grant?
Yeah.
Here's the basic science stuff, right?
I mean, if I can't get them interested in network models,
I don't know about getting into the nuts and bolts
of which data frame API we should have people use.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
All right, well, let's close this whole conversation out
by talking about something that I know
is on a lot of people's minds, and that's LLMs.
And, you know, what do LLMs mean for this mapping data
the types of questions you can answer and osmnx all these types of things like how's that
shaping your world yeah so um two ways that i like to think about it one is what llms have to offer
us today and then one is what llms have to offer us say five to ten years from now that is how do
we future proof ourselves our careers our livelihoods and i i mean or just optimistically
how do we really get ahead of it to take advantage of nice things that they'll have to offer.
Today, I am deeply unimpressed with most of the use cases that I see for it. I think that the
outputs only look good to people who aren't experts and don't know how wrong it is. It does some
things well, you know, like having a co-pilot while you're coding and having it recommending.
That's nice. I mean, it's like tab complete from years ago. It's the same kind of thing,
just iterating it but you know when when someone tells it to you know here's here's the prompt
generate my algorithm for me two things one it very often doesn't do that good of a job even at this
point and number two if you don't enjoy doing that kind of thing i'm not sure why you're in software
development in the first place i know for me when i interface with it it's usually in the classroom
and you'll have so you know people like to complain kids these days it's the same way it was when i
was in school you know a third of the class loves a subject they're just killing it they want to be
there they want a job in this a third of the class they're like well it's a required class i'll try
to do what i can and a third of them say i don't know why i'm here why is this a required course i
hate this is there any way i can cheat just get a passing grade where's my shortcut exactly i mean
And the difference today is that LLMs make it so much easier and they really normalized cheating as well.
Where we don't have that good of systems in place to be able to detect it for code, for writing, for anything.
And I think one of the problems here, it goes back to licensing or attribution.
When we normalize this kind of cheating, we're normalizing taking credit for things that aren't our work.
And if we're doing that in school, we build those habits.
What's it going to look like when we're working in the workforce?
We either don't have the skills that people think we have,
or we think it's just normal, acceptable practice to copy and paste and say,
here's my intellectual contribution.
It's too much of a crutch.
And if, you know, maybe it solves 90% of the problems, but that 10%, it doesn't.
You're fully incapable of approaching that problem, right?
Exactly. Yeah.
And I think, you know, so that's the first part, what LLMs offer us today.
I think the second part is, say, five to 10 years from now.
And part of it is scary and part of it is exciting.
I think that coding, as it looks today, is going to largely go away over my lifetime.
Because coding is this mix of art and intellectual labor and manual labor.
The manual labor parts, you know, will be going away.
And that's where a lot of people use LLMs now to reduce some of that grind of coding.
And I think it's important for us to figure out where those intellectual contributions are, where the art, the poetry of coding remains a human contribution moving forward.
Where we have, you know, that sort of human in the loop to make ethical decisions that we don't pass off.
Where it is humans who are doing some of the architecting and not just handing it off saying, here's a prompt.
Now, redesign our financial system from the ground up for us, but that it remains human guardrails and human ethics and human notions of justice that we use AI to help us, but doesn't replace that.
Yeah, I feel like there's going to be a lot of people who are programmers now are going to have to kind of be a senior tech team lead type of thing where the team is asking the LLM to do stuff for you.
And that's going to be awesome for those people, us.
But for the people who are brand new, there's going to be a wider gap to try to cross.
It's going to be harder and harder to go from real beginner to that level.
Who's going to employ you when it takes you a day?
And I can ask the LLM to do it in five minutes and I got to review it either way.
That's a very concerning social consequence, I think.
Exactly.
I think those kind of entry-level jobs are very much more labor-focused, right?
The senior dev isn't doing that work because someone with less experience, less pay can do it.
And if LLMs replace that over time, it's really hard to get your foot in the door of that industry.
It's going to be like COBOL programmers did not a program without an LLM someday.
Yeah.
I don't know if that's good or bad, but it's going to be weird.
Anyway, I think it's probably pretty interesting.
And given access with your API and with all this data,
I'm sure people will be able to ask and answer interesting questions with it.
That's the hope.
Indeed.
All right.
Two really quick things to close out our conversation.
Roadmap.
Anything on the roadmap coming real soon that people have been asking about, thinking about?
Yeah.
So I just released V2.0 a month ago.
Thank you. And that was really just a year of rethinking the API.
You know, I was going to allow myself breaking changes, really cleaning things up.
I added type annotations for the first time.
I really changed the linting and formatting, CI, pre-commit, everything.
So it's a much more rigorous package at this point.
I'm taking a breather right now where I don't have that much big on the horizon.
I try to keep a really clean issue board as well, where I quickly triage.
This is in scope.
This is not.
Yeah, I noticed you have three open issues and zero PRs, which is awesome.
Yeah, I try to do it courteously, where I'll tell people a lot of the time, you know, this isn't in scope for the project, but I appreciate the suggestion.
But I'm busy, so keeping a clean issue board makes my life simple.
So short answer, I'm taking a breather instead of road mapping.
But you just had a big release, which is cool.
Yeah.
contributions accepted? Absolutely. And very often what I, what I ask when someone opens an issue
and I say that it does sound useful. Would you like to open a PR? I, you know, and as much as
this is my side hustle, most of the pull requests that I add to it are very much aligned with a
current or recent research project that I'm working on. Right. So for others, you know,
if you see a gap or a cool feature that could make people's lives easier,
better analytics down the road, please propose it.
And I'd love a contribution.
Excellent.
All right.
Final call to action.
People are psyched about mapping.
They want to get started.
What do you tell them?
I tell them to work through existing examples from the tools that are out
there.
If you haven't done any kind of mapping before,
there's a lot of cool packages in R and in Python.
Find something you're comfortable with,
work through some tutorials,
and then figure out something close to home.
It's so much easier if you have that kind of local motivation,
local knowledge, do some mapping,
do an analysis in your community
for something that's bothering you
that you think could be better.
- Excellent.
All right, well, thank you for being here
and congrats on the cool project.
- Thank you very much.
- Yep, bye.